[MUSIC] In this lecture,
we'll talk about theory construction. In most of the course,
we talked about statistical inferences, drawing inferences from data. But of course, what we really want to
know is whether your theory is true or not and can predict something. Generating a good theory is difficult, and it depends a little bit on the specific
research area are you working. But we can give some
general recommendations. Now in most of this course we've been
talking about statistical hypothesis and drawing statistical inferences. But as a researcher of course what you
want to do is draw theoretical inferences. To do this, you of course first
have to have a good theory that you can use to create
a statistical hypothesis. So we see that statistical inferences and theory generation are basically
two sides of the same coin. A scientific theory is a set of testable
statements about the relation between observations. And whenever we collect data, we do so with the goal to test some of these
statements, to try to make an inference about whether the theory has
good predictive power or not. Now we focus a lot on
testing these theories but not a lot of theory construction. This is an important topic in itself. Sometimes more difficult to teach. But it's really important to keep in mind
that theories are really what's driving the goal of doing research. I'll give some suggestions
on how to come up with good ideas to generate theoretical predictions. Some of these are based on this book,
Theory Construction and Model-Building Skills, which focuses a lot on how to do
this within the social sciences. So if you're interested in this topic, I would highly recommend that
you take a look at this book. So which approaches can we use? One used approach in science is to
come up with a thought experiment. A very well known thought experiment is
done by Einstein when he asks himself, what would you see if you could
travel at the speed of light? So by coming up with this though
experiment and thinking about what would happen, you can create theoretical
predictions that are testable. Another approach that we use in
the social sciences is sometimes to rely on your personal experiences. What happens to you, and can you come
up with a theoretical prediction based on something that someone tells you? One example is Stanley Milgram's mother. Over dinner, she complained that nobody in
public transport would give up their seats if she entered the public bus. So Stanley Milgram was interested
in the social norms in cities and he looked at whether people would actually
give up their seats depending on how you asked these questions. He found the 56% of the people actually
would give up their seat if you nicely asked. Another approach is to try to
empathize with other people. Put yourself in someone else's shoes and think, what drives the behavior
of this individual? In psychology, a well known
example of this is the question, how it is possible that people who worked
in concentration camps did what they did? This inspired a lot of theory
development on authority, for example. You can also use observations. Let's say you go out and you buy a car and you look at the car salesman,
what do these people do to sell you a car? What kind of ticks do they use and how
can this inform you about persuasion and theories about how to make
more persuasive arguments? Another approach we often
use is to rely on metaphors. Now a metaphor should never be
a replacement of an existing theory, but it can be used to inspire
theoretical reasoning. In memory research, one of the theoretical models is
the model of memory like a storage bin. Whatever you put in last in a storage
bin is also most easily retrieved. So one theoretical prediction based on
this metaphorical line of reasoning could be, is it also the case in human
memory that whatever we store last is most easily retrieved? What's always a good idea as
a scientist is to ask why and how like a three year old. Don't take anything for granted. When you read about
theories in the literature, always ask, why would this be the case? What's going on? What's the underlying mechanism? And this can inspire new
theoretical questions. Finally, a good idea is to have
broad interest as a scientist. We see that many of the most
ground breaking ideas come from introducing ideas in other scientific
disciplines into your own research line. You don't have to limit yourself
to other scientific disciplines. You can also be inspired by movies or
books or whatever you see and hear. Now after you have generated
some hypothesis and some theory, it's good to try
to formalize this theory and this theoretical prediction
as well as possible. One idea is to use multiple
modalities to do so. So you can use words to describe
your theory, figures and numbers. For example, let's say we have
the theoretical hypothesis that students are happier than teachers,
but especially on hot days. The idea being that on these hot days,
students are free to go out and enjoy the weather while teachers are, of course, working inside, preparing your
next lecture or grading your assignments. So we can visualize this in
the form of a simple graph. We can have a statistical hypothesis
saying that this is ANOVA and we should find an interaction. Or you can even try to specify the numbers
that you expect to observe in each of the conditions in this design. When you define your theoretical
prediction, it's always good to think about the boundary conditions
of the effect that you predict. It's very rare, at least in psychology, to have a universal theory
of some sort of effect. There are always boundary conditions. You should not make statement
that generalizes over everything that's possible. One thing you can try to do is think
when would actually the opposite while I'm predicting being true? McGuire challenges readers to think about
the situation that every proposition is occasionally true, at least in certain
contexts viewed from certain perspectives. He calls this perspectivism. His idea is that it always depends. So whatever theory you have,
it might be true, but it always depends on certain context. And he even goes as far as
to say that the opposite of any theoretical prediction is
also true depending on situations. So try to define these boundary conditions
in this context as well as possible when you make a theoretical prediction. Fiedler distinguishes between two
parts in the scientific cycle. A loosening stage,
where we generate theoretical ideas, and a tightening stage where we select and
test the best of these ideas. Now when we're in the loosening stage, you have to create as much
random variation as possible. Anything goes. Whatever helps you to generate
good theoretical ideas goes. So you can play around with data,
explore, come up with crazy ideas. And that's all fine. Only later in the tightening stage comes
the part of the process where we think okay, which of these IDs that
we generated was actually good? Which should we reject and
which can we use to keep going? You can think of what
a theory would really imply, come up with as many as possible ideas of
what the theoretical prediction actually is when you read about something
in the literature, for example. You can play around with methods. If you have some sort
of measurement device, try to use it in all
sorts of different ways. You can also play around with data. You might even simulate data
to see what would happen depending on specific assumptions, and
then subsequently use the ideas that come from these simulations
to test them on people. Or you can explore existing data sets. Now of course we've talked about how
exploring data sets can increase the type one error rates. But here,
we're not talking about the testing stage, not the tightening stage
of theory testing. We're talking about generating ideas and
anything goes. So if you look at data sets and
you can come up with a very good theoretical prediction,
that's perfectly fine. Of course, after generating this idea, you
actually want to move on to the tightening stage and
see whether this idea actually holds. But that's a different function. It comes later in the scientific cycle. Now in this lecture, we've talked
about generating theoretical ideas. Throughout the course, we mainly focus
on drawing valid statistical inferences. But you cannot draw good statistical
inferences without having a good theory. So theory construction and
generating valid theoretical predictions is just as important as
statistical inferences, although it might be
more difficult to teach. It's important to keep in
mind that a good theory and good statistical inferences
are two sides of the same coin. [MUSIC]